docs: TGSL guide (#1231)
software-mansion/TypeGPU: apps/typegpu-docs/src/content/docs/fundamentals/tgsl.mdx

    const maxY = std.min(
      d.i32(gridSize),
      d.i32(obs.center.y) + d.i32(obs.size.y) / 2,
    );

    if (x >= minX && x <= maxX && y >= minY && y <= maxY) {
      return true;
    }
  }

  return false;
});
```

```ts
import {
  oklabGamutClip,
  oklabGamutClipAlphaAccess,
  oklabGamutClipSlot,
  oklabToLinearRgb,
  oklabToRgb,
} from '@typegpu/color';
import tgpu from 'typegpu';
import * as d from 'typegpu/data';
import { any, cos, floor, gt, lt, mul, select, sin } from 'typegpu/std';

const mainFragment = tgpu['~unstable'].fragmentFn({
  in: { uv: d.vec2f },
  out: d.vec4f,
})((input) => {
  const hue = layout.$.uniforms.hue;
  const pos = scaleView(input.uv);
  const lab = d.vec3f(
    pos.y,
    mul(pos.x, d.vec2f(cos(hue), sin(hue))),
  );
  const rgb = oklabToLinearRgb(lab);
  const outOfGamut = any(lt(rgb, d.vec3f(0))) || any(gt(rgb, d.vec3f(1)));

  const clipLab = oklabGamutClipSlot.value(lab);
  const color = oklabToRgb(lab);

  const patternScaled = patternSlot.value(input.uv, clipLab) * 0.1 + 0.9;

  return d.vec4f(select(color, mul(patternScaled, color), outOfGamut), 1);
});
```

## What to keep in mind

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

* **TGSL limitations** --
For a function to be valid TGSL, it must consist only of supported JS syntax (again, see [tinyest-for-wgsl repository](https://github.com/software-mansion/TypeGPU/blob/release/packages/tinyest-for-wgsl/src/parsers.ts)), possibly including references to bound buffers, constant variables defined outside of the function, other TGSL functions etc.
This means that, for example, `console.log()` calls will not work on the GPU.

```
This point follows clearly from the paragraphs above, but I think it still may help users better organize their knowledge about TGSL.

Also when passing them to functions, they are able to be modified there, unless the user specifically clones the passed argument
(in WGSL vectors are copied by default). When using TGSL on the GPU, the behavior is that of WGSL, not JS, as one would expect.
Therefore some WGSL knowledge is still required, even when opting out for TGSL.

* **.value** --
Objects that have different types on the CPU and on the GPU (like buffers, layouts, slots etc.) need to be accessed via the `value` property in TGSL functions.
This is different from how they appear in WGSL-implemented ones.

```ts twoslash
import tgpu from 'typegpu';
import * as d from 'typegpu/data';

const root = await tgpu.init();

const backgroundColorUniform = root['~unstable'].createUniform(d.vec4f, d.vec4f(0.114, 0.447, 0.941, 1));

const fragmentTgsl = tgpu['~unstable'].fragmentFn({
  out: d.location(0, d.vec4f),
})(() => backgroundColorUniform.value);
//                              ^?

const fragmentWgsl = tgpu['~unstable'].fragmentFn({
  out: d.location(0, d.vec4f),
})`{ 
  return backgroundColorUniform; 
}`.$uses({ backgroundColorUniform });
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

* **Operators** --
JavaScript does not support operator overloading. 
This means that, while you can still use operators for numbers, 
you have to use supplementary functions from `typegpu/std` (*add, mul, eq, lt, ge...*) for operations involving vectors and matrices.

```

---
title: TGSL
description: Guide on using JavaScript for WebGPU function definitions.
---

:::caution[Experimental]
This feature is under heavy development and is yet to reach stability.
:::

> **TGSL (TypeGPU Shading Language)** is a subset of JavaScript that can be used for defining functions run on the GPU via TypeGPU.

Reviewer 2: Small suggestion
```suggestion
**TGSL (TypeGPU Shading Language)** is a subset of JavaScript used to define functions that run on the GPU via TypeGPU.
```

It works by transpiling JavaScript into a compact AST format, called [tinyest](https://www.npmjs.com/package/tinyest), 
which is then used to generate equivalent WGSL.

You can check the current state of supported JavaScript syntax in the [tinyest-for-wgsl repository](https://github.com/software-mansion/TypeGPU/blob/release/packages/tinyest-for-wgsl/src/parsers.ts).

For the TGSL functions to work, you need to use either the dedicated build plugin -- [unplugin-typegpu](/TypeGPU/tooling/unplugin-typegpu), 
or the Just-In-Time transpiler -- *tgpu-jit* (WIP).

## Usage

Instead of using a WGSL code string, you can pass TGSL to the tgpu function shell as an argument instead.
Functions from the WGSL standard library (*distance, arrayLength, workgroupBarrier, [etc.](https://github.com/software-mansion/TypeGPU/blob/release/packages/typegpu/src/std/index.ts)*) are accessible through the `typegpu/std` endpoint. 
The package also includes functions for vector and matrix operators (*add, eq, lt...*).

```ts
import tgpu from 'typegpu';
import * as d from 'typegpu/data';
import * as std from 'typegpu/std';

const obstaclesReadonly = root
  .createBuffer(d.arrayOf(d.struct({

>     center: d.vec2u,
>     size: d.vec2u,

Reviewer 2: Required by the changes to the function implementation
```suggestion
    center: d.vec2i,
    size: d.vec2i,
```

    enabled: d.u32,
  }), 4))
  .$usage('storage')
  .as('readonly');

const isInsideObstacle = tgpu['~unstable'].fn(
  [d.i32, d.i32],
  d.bool,
)((x, y) => {

>   for (let obsIdx = 0; obsIdx < MAX_OBSTACLES; obsIdx++) {

Reviewer 2: Could we define `MAX_OBSTACLES` somewhere?

Maybe:
```ts
const MAX_OBSTACLES = 4;
```

> const isInsideObstacle = tgpu['~unstable'].fn(
>   [d.i32, d.i32],
>   d.bool,
> )((x, y) => {
>   for (let obsIdx = 0; obsIdx < MAX_OBSTACLES; obsIdx++) {
>     const obs = obstaclesReadonly.value[obsIdx];
> 
>     if (obs.enabled === 0) {
>       continue;
>     }
> 
>     const minX = std.max(0, d.i32(obs.center.x) - d.i32(obs.size.x) / 2);
>     const maxX = std.min(
>       d.i32(gridSize),
>       d.i32(obs.center.x) + d.i32(obs.size.x) / 2,
>     );
>     const minY = std.max(0, d.i32(obs.center.y) - d.i32(obs.size.y) / 2);
>     const maxY = std.min(
>       d.i32(gridSize),
>       d.i32(obs.center.y) + d.i32(obs.size.y) / 2,
>     );
> 
>     if (x >= minX && x <= maxX && y >= minY && y <= maxY) {
>       return true;
>     }
>   }
> 
>   return false;
> });

Reviewer 2: Did a small round of clean-up to the "Fluid (double-buffering)" example, to make it look a bit more pleasant 🧽🫧

```suggestion
const isInsideObstacle = tgpu['~unstable'].fn([d.i32, d.i32], d.bool)(
  (x, y) => {
    for (let obsIdx = 0; obsIdx < MAX_OBSTACLES; obsIdx++) {
      const obs = obstaclesReadonly.value[obsIdx];

      if (obs.enabled === 0) {
        continue;
      }

      const minX = std.max(0, obs.center.x - d.i32(obs.size.x / 2));
      const maxX = std.min(gridSize, obs.center.x + d.i32(obs.size.x / 2));
      const minY = std.max(0, obs.center.y - d.i32(obs.size.y / 2));
      const maxY = std.min(gridSize, obs.center.y + d.i32(obs.size.y / 2));

      if (x >= minX && x <= maxX && y >= minY && y <= maxY) {
        return true;
      }
    }

    return false;
  },
);
```
